# Overriding the delete[] operator
## How does delete[] know the length of the array?

Today I was working on improving the memory management system of one of my projects and one of the tasks was to override the delete[] operator:

    void operator delete[]  ( void* ptr ) noexcept;

For the first time I looked at this function with different eyes as today I'm not just redirecting it to some OS/language automagic memory allocation routine but am using my own memory management system, where I don't store the length of the array. So how come calling `delete[] something` still works?

Defining this operator in your source code will effectively override the default delete[] operator - or at least one of its multiple flavours. If you check the documentation on [cppreference.com](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/delete) you'll read:

> If expression is not a null pointer and the deallocation function is not a destroying delete (since C++20), **the delete expression invokes the destructor** (if any) for the object that's being destroyed, or **for every element of the array being destroyed** (proceeding from the last element to the first element of the array).

So how does the delete expression "know" the size of the array? It must certainly know given it will call the destructor *for every element of the array*. It must be stored somewhere and the most obvious location to store that would be the infamous allocation header. What's an allocation header?

When you ask your OS to allocate some memory (normally by stating something like `new MyClass()` or by calling `malloc()`), the OS needs to store important information about that allocation, like its size, so that when you call `free()` or `delete my_instance` it'll know how much memory to reclaim. But that allocation header is not handled by the language, it's opaque and managed directly by the OS! So there is no way delete[] could possibly access that header safely. My guess is.. wait for it.. A SECOND HEADER!

Wouldn't it make sense? If the language would also allocate its own header along with the header allocated by the OS, it would be able to store this information for later use. Now, if this were to be true, our `operator new[](std::size_t count)` would receive a `count` bigger than what is actually requested by the user. How big? Well, the language says nothing about this so that excess would be a compiler-specific value, most probably `sizeof(std::size_t)`.

Time for a quick experiment:

    #include <cstdio>

    struct Y{
        int x;
    };

    struct X {
        int x;
        ~X() { puts("Destroyed"); }
    };

    char space[1024];

    void *operator new(std::size_t count) {
        printf("Allocating %llu bytes\n", (unsigned long long)count);

        return space;
    }

    void *operator new[](std::size_t count) {
        printf("Allocating %llu bytes\n", (unsigned long long)count);

        return space;
    }

    int main(int argc, const char ** argv) {
        new Y;
        new Y[2];
        new Y[argc];

        puts("************************");

        new X;
        new X[2];
        new X[argc];

        return 0;
    }

This code declares two structures, both of size `sizeof(int)`. On my machine this is 4 bytes. One has a destructor that does something (we don't really care what it does as we won't be calling it) while the other doesn't. Then, after overriding the new & new[] operators so that they print on screen the requested size and return a dummy memory location (hence no real allocation will happen!), the main tries to allocate the two structures in three different ways: a single value, an array of fixed size and an array of size specified by a value that is not a compile-time constant.

Here's the interesting output:

    Allocating 4 bytes
    Allocating 8 bytes
    Allocating 4 bytes
    ************************
    Allocating 4 bytes
    Allocating 16 bytes
    Allocating 12 bytes

Gotcha! Both the non-array allocations get as their `count` argument the effective size of the structs and that's to be expected as the length of a non-array is always one. Nothing interesting here. The second and third allocations though become more interesting.

For structure Y, which has no destructor, allocating a fixed-size array of length 2 will result in just the double of `sizeof(Y)`, so 8. Nothing extra is stored and that's because there is no need to. Destroying Y requires no special action as it has no explicit destructor defined and all its data members are POD, so their destruction requires no action to be taken as well.

The second allocation of type X, which is of the same size as Y but with a user-defined destructor defined, adds 8 extra bytes, that could be our array length as a `sizeof(std::size_t)` value.

*For the third allocations it's important to note the test program was called without arguments, so the value of `argc` is 1.*

The third allocation of type Y only allocates the size of the structure. Again this is to be expected as we don't need to know the size of the array as the delete expression won't be calling any destructor, just deallocate a chunk of memory where the size is in the non-language-managed header.

The third allocation of type X allocates 12 bytes: 4 for the instance of X and 8 for a `std::size_t` number as the count of elements.

Given these are language facilities, I would expect - if these extra bytes are effectively used to store the size - some extra assembly to be generated after the call to the `new[]` operator to store the size and the returned pointer to be increased by the size of the extra space, effectively creating a compiler-managed header.

To quickly spot this, I modified the main routine as follows:

    int main(int argc, const char ** argv) {
        auto x2 = new X[2];
        x2 = reinterpret_cast<decltype(x2)>(0xabcde);

        auto x_argc = new X[argc];
        x_argc = reinterpret_cast<decltype(x2)>(0x1234);

        return 0;
    }

There is no need to get all the values, so we can just limit the amount of `new` expressions in the main function to the two most interesting ones and generate the assembly by running:

    clang++ test.cpp

Here's an edited extract from the main, showing only the first allocation as the second behaves likewise:

	movl	$0, 84(%rsp)
	movq	%rdx, 72(%rsp)
	movl	%ecx, 68(%rsp)

    # Call new[2] but request 16 bytes
	movl	$16, %ecx
	callq	"??_U@YAPEAX_K@Z"

    # Store the length of the array in the returned memory region
	movq	$2, (%rax)

    # Store the pointer to the returned memory region address + 8 bytes
	addq	$8, %rax
	movq	%rax, 56(%rsp)


The extra space is effectively used to store the length of the array and that's how the compiler knows the size when deleting, without any need for input from the user.

As seen earlier, I'm using clang (version 10) so your compiler (or version of clang) can potentially store the information in a different way.
